## Unveiling genetic complexity in rats through pangenome graphs and Genome-Phenome analysis

Flavia Villani1, Andrea Guarracino1,2, Rachel Ward3, Tomomi Green3, Madeleine Emms4, Michal Pravenec5, Pjotr Prins1, Erik Garrison1, Robert W. Williams1, Hao Chen3, Vincenza Colonna1,4

1Department of Genetics, Genomics and Informatics, University of Tennessee Health Science Center 2Genomics Research Centre, Human Technopole,Italy 3Department of Pharmacology, Addiction Science, and Toxicology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center 4Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, National Research Council, Italy 5Institute of Physiology, Czech Academy of Sciences.

The HXB/BXH (HXB) family of recombinant inbred strains of rats has an unrivaled phenome with quantitative molecular and organismal phenotypes that have been systematically accumulated for over 25 years. We generated a pangenome for the HXB family of rats and used this resource to evaluate the functional impact of both known and new genetic variants. We sequenced both parents and all 30 progeny strains using linked-read libraries at ~40x coverage. We used PGGB to construct the family pangenome graph and to compute the frequency of major classes of DNA variants. Validation of SNVs on Chr 12 by Sanger sequencing underscored pangenome's potential for uncovering novel genetic variants, especially those residing in complex regions (repetitive regions and p-arm regions). Functional annotation of these variants highlighted their potential roles in gene regulation and molecular mechanisms. We focused on 12 validated genetic markers exclusively identified via the pangenome graph. We conducted a Phenome-Wide Association Study (PheWAS) to explore the broader significance of these novel variants. Intriguingly, we identified associations between specific markers and phenotypic traits, including a link between a lncRNA-encoding region and insulin concentration. Another association was found between a marker at 18.8 Mb and the insulin/glucose ratio in line with previous research. Specifically, our results align with a previously reported QTL highlighting a genomic region significantly linked to insulin resistance at T 30 min at 19.6 Mb. The investigation of structural variants (SVs) in Chr12 further confirmed the pangenome's reliability in detecting variations. We identified 2,481 high-confidence SVs, underscoring their presence in the SHR/OlaIpcv sample, 27 of which are predicted to have high impact. We validated 13 novel SVs with long-read sequencing using Nanopore technology. Out of 13, two insertions and four deletions consistently observed in the SHR/OlaIpcv sample and spanning multiple individuals were successfully validated. One deletion, that is preceded by simple repeats, was consistently present in all samples and situated within the Lmtk2 gene. Mutations in the Lmtk2 gene have been linked to multiple neurological disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and schizophrenia. These results demonstrate that pangenomes constructed from linked-reads can provide valuable information about genetic variation, making it a useful tool for the study of complex traits.
