# mRatBN7 ushers in a new era of rat genomics and genetics research

de Jong T, Pan Y, Murphy T, Martin F, Akil H, Benner C, Chitre A, Colonna E, Dalgard C, Doris PA, Dwinell M, Garrison E, Geurts A, Gillette T, Gunturkun MH, Guryev V, Haggerty L, Hourlier T, Howe K, Howe K, Jun H, Kalbfleisch T, Mohammadi P, Mortazavi M, Munro D, Ozel AB, Polesskaya O, Pravenec M, Prins P, Rastas PMA, Saba L, Sharp B, Tabakoff B, Telese F, Tutaj M, Villani F, Wang X,
Palmer AA, Williams RW, Kwitek AE, Li J, Chen H 

mRatBN7.2 is the latest rat reference genome. Both genomic sequences and their annotations are
now available from NCBI, Ensembl, and UCSC (rn7). Compared to rn6, the previous reference,
mRatBN7 reduced the total genomic length from 2.87 to 2.64 Gbp and vastly improved contiguity:
reducing the number of scaffolds from 1,395 to 176. Gene annotations are similarly improved, with a
55% reduction in duplicated genes by BUSCO, 70% reduction in protein-coding genes affected by
frameshifts or gaps, and 1.5% increase in 1:1 orthologs vs human. Mapping whole genome
sequencing (WGS) data for 36 inbred strains showed that the fraction of mapped reads increased by
2% and the percentage of genomic locations with no coverage was reduced from 2% to nearly 0% on
mRatBN7 for most samples. mRatBN7 also reduced the number of variants shared by all samples
(likely errors in the reference) to ~130K, a 10-fold reduction from rn6. These improvements have
benefited the analysis of transcriptomics and proteomics data. For example, in an RNA-Seq dataset,
the percentage of reads that aligned uniquely to a genomic location went from 89.3% on rn6 to 94.6%
on mRatBN7. Our joint analysis of WGS data for 27 inbred and 39 recombinant inbred strains as part
of the hybrid rat diversity panel (HRDP) identified 82,089 high and moderate impact variants, affecting
18,603 genes. These results show that the mRatBN7 enhances the quality of genomic resources for
use with rats as a model system in biomedical research
